the lottery it's the second best use of
magic marker on ping-pong balls after
Kermit the frog's eyes now this past
week saw a huge Mega Millions draw a big
winning lottery ticket was sold in New
York lots of people around here have
been peeking at their lottery tickets
this morning in the Mega Millions
mystery this evening at 321 million
dollar jackpot the search for the winner
is on tonight well the winner should be
too hard to find if someone at your work
this week marched in and told everyone
to go themselves
before flipping their desk over and
storming out that's probably your winner
right there but but don't worry if you
didn't hit the jackpot
you will frankly have an unbelievable
number of other opportunities to play 44
states currently have lotteries and you
can't have missed the commercials
featuring everything from a ping-pong
ball thunderstorm to a furry dressed as
a cat playing with a ball of money to a
weird lucky man who for some reason had
decided to spend his lottery winnings
terrifying a penguin by taking it hang
gliding that is a bizarrely specific use
of a big lottery win look if my numbers
come up I'm strapping a penguin to my
chest and I'm taking to the skies cue
evolution I decide who flies that's why
shorts Reuters
moku commercials lottery commercials are
incredibly seductive and they're also
everywhere states spend half a billion
dollars on them every year and the
reason they do that is that the lottery
is a massive moneymaker for them last
year alone lottery sales totaled about
68 billion dollars 68 billion that's
more than Americans spent last year on
movie tickets music porn the NFL Major
League Baseball and video games combined
which means Americans basically spent
more on the lottery than they spent on
America and if you think about it it's a
little strange for the government to be
running what is basically a gigantic
gambling business but we don't think
about lotteries like that perhaps
because they're sold to us more as
charitable foundations three billion
dollars for education opens a lot of
doors the Tennessee lottery
game-changing life-changing fun
education matters to Oregonians that's
wherever five billion in lottery dollars
have gone to support public education
the Oregon lottery it does good things
every time you play in New York lottery
game a portion of your sale goes to aid
New York State skinny children just like
them
New York lottery everybody wins thank
you for being a friend those ads are
basically implying that anyone who does
not play the lottery is selfish hey what
do you want to educate these harmonizing
children your monster so let's
take a look at those slogans
everybody wins the lottery does good
things and it's game-changing
life-changing fun is it does it and do
they look let's start with the basics
the lottery generates sixty eight
billion dollars in sales a year so where
does that money come from over the
course of the last two decades multiple
studies have found lower-income
households spent a higher percentage of
their money on lottery tickets good that
kind of makes sense lots of people like
to gamble and for lower-income
households a lottery is an affordable
way to do it but generally when wealthy
people want to take risks with their
money they either choose to invest in
the stock market or they leave their
wife for Amba without signing a prenup
because
and us forever besides she just gets you
she's a little tiring but she'll be
there the lottery is in the business of
selling people hope and they do a great
job of that
start a college fund for our kids
start a college fund for their kids
again with jackpots worthy of your
dreams Mega Millions dream mega that
feels like an ad for a mutual fund but
crucially the lottery is not an
investment because it's worth mentioning
that those mega dreams are mega unlikely
to happen what are the real chances of
winning a lousy one in a hundred and
seventy six million winning the Mega
Millions is akin to getting struck by
lightning at the same time you're being
eaten by a shark okay that that is both
an evocative image and an amazing pitch
for a movie okay so there's this guy
he's getting eaten by a shark see
lightning hits him he switches minds
with the shark the shark wins the
lottery it's Freaky Friday meets jaws
I'm calling it slum shark Gillian air
slow shock million-selling thinking has
passed yeah now the lottery does have
some smaller games and prizes where the
odds are a little better but even then
it pays out a much lower percentage of
its revenues than even a horse racing
and the worst part is when you lose the
lottery and you're angry with your
ticket you don't even have the
satisfaction of knowing that it'll be
turned into dog food and yet and yet we
are still drawn to the lottery Parli
because we're told to ignore the odds
it's your dream anything can happen
dream play win hey you never know power
your dreams for just 2 bucks those ads
are so effective in the time it took you
to watch that montage I went out and
bought all of these lottery tickets
someone's gotta win it might as well be
me
but even when people do win big things
have a tendency to go south fast
we've all seen tragic headlines about
lottery winners like a lottery winner
blows through 27 million lottery winner
found dead in bed or brother hired
hitman over 16 million jackpot win it
seems winning the lottery can be like
marrying Tom Cruise sure it seems
amazing in your mind
you might even dream about it happening
one day but if it actually does five
years later the magic will be over
you'll be estranged from your family and
you will have seen things you can never
unsee never in Israel in Israel lottery
winners are actually photographed
wearing masks to protect their
identities and in the 90s this is how
one man from Gaza collected his prize
most lottery winners don't turn up with
a bag over their head but this 24 year
old Palestinian wanted to remain
anonymous that's right
winning the lottery is such a curse that
you can find yourself in the Middle East
with a bag over your head because
something good happened to you so so why
do people play well for some they can't
stop the lottery can be extremely
addictive and states know this many
lotteries offer resources to help
problem gamblers the Illinois Lottery
even has a section on their website for
Responsible gaming although when we
clicked on the link we got and this is
true a pop-up ad for the lotto seriously
Illinois there is a reason that the
first step in a 12-step program isn't
congratulations on starting the program
will not reward yourself with a
refreshing gin and tonic Cheers
I'm sure I'm sure
but that is just an innocent mistake
just like I'm sure that it's a
coincidence that if you google lottery
intervention this is what comes up need
a lottery intervention play the new DC
fast play games from the DC lottery
feel the thrill of winning instantly are
you kidding me someone of the DC lottery
deserves a promotion before they go
directly to hell and at the very same
time they're supposedly addressing
problem gambling states are actively
expanding into even more addictive
products just look at Oregon the lottery
takes in about it makes about a billion
dollars every two years for the state
about 80% of it maybe even more eighty
six ninety percent yeah that's what
we're running right there yeah the
screen boy comes from one source and
that's these video machines mostly video
slot machines or video poker the vast
majority of Oregon's lottery income
comes from video slots and video poker
meaning that Oregon claims this is a
lottery machine because of course it is
just like this is a lottery wheel and
this is a lottery table and of course we
all remember Martin Scorsese's movie
lottery machines machines like these are
not only addictive they're incredibly
lucrative internal Oregon lottery data
indicates that regular lottery players
lost an average of 106 dollars per year
whereas video poker and slots players
lost an average of two thousand five
hundred and sixty four dollars that's an
insane amount of money you could buy a
98 Mazda with that money and you should
you should it's got a moonroof and six
way speakers you should get in it right
now and drive in the opposite direction
of any video poker machine although good
luck with that if you live in Oregon
because these machines are everywhere
there are more than 12,000 of them in
the state and that kind of ubiquity puts
some people in serious danger my
boyfriend and I have got gotten into
into fights over you know I'll go out
you know I'm just going somewhere with
with a friend of mine and I end up
playing video poker and where I'm
supposed to go to the store to buy food
and I come home with no food and no
money you know soon as I walk in the
door he knows and then we don't have any
food remember the machines that are
causing her starts trouble a run by the
state a state which proclaims its
lottery does good things at this point
I'm thinking it may not be a coincidence
that the logo
for the Oregon State Lottery is someone
crossing their fingers the universal
sign for lying okay so so maybe maybe
the next question maybe the next
customer should be this why do state
lawmakers keep approving all this well
as those singing children told us
lotteries are really all about good
causes like education that's always been
the excuse state lotteries were illegal
in this country until 1964 when New
Hampshire launched the first one under
the guise of a very familiar message how
come you're buying one of these pickles
this is the first one in our country and
I would like to participate in it and I
also feel that it's very very good cause
of education I don't think there's a
better reason for buying well there
probably isn't a better reason but there
are plenty of better ways to fund
education sales tax bake sale or simply
putting cash into an envelope writing
school on the front of it and mailing it
because for all the claims for all the
claims that lotteries are a huge boost
to education the reality is a little
different our investigation of
government spending in the 24 states
that dedicate lottery funds for
education yields a stunningly bad report
card the percentage of state spending on
education is down or flat in 21 of those
states from coast-to-coast
lotteries provided no additional funding
for education in 21 out of 24 states as
math students in one of those places
would put it that is nearly 50% how is
this how is this possible
what look let's let's please just look
at North Carolina
their governor inaugurated the North
Carolina Education Lottery nearly a
decade ago with big promises when the
lottery is fully implemented
we'll be adding another half billion
dollars annually for education half a
billion extra that sounds great you
think by now all North Carolina
preschoolers would be strutting around
in fine bespoke suits quoting Nietzsche
and Kierkegaard but in fact North
Carolina currently spends less per
student on education than it did when
the lottery even began and if you're
thinking how the is that possible
it's because money and state budgets
tends to move around a lot
try to add money just for one purpose
it's a bit like trying to piss in one
corner of a swimming pool it's going all
over the place no matter what you play
let me give you just a narrow example in
2012 North Carolina used 100 million
dollars of lottery money for school
construction but that didn't mean the
school construction budget was 100
million bigger than it would have been
because while that money was flowing in
other money was flowing out a portion of
corporate income taxes used to go toward
construction but when the lottery passed
that tax money went away substituted
with lottery revenue and why did that
corporate tax money go who knows there's
not even a warm spot where it once was
but put in a completely unconnected
development North Carolina plans to cut
corporate taxes substantially over the
next few years so thanks for playing the
education lottery North Carolina better
luck next time but despite all this
states are not only keeping faith in
lotteries they're doubling down and
trying to reach new players by putting
it on your cell phone
Illinois launched an app this year to
let you buy tickets on your phone which
is terrifying because we all know that
if starting right now your mother could
play the lottery as easily as she plays
candy crush in three weeks
she'd be preparing Thanksgiving dinner
over a trash can fire
but what I'm sure I'm sure that Illinois
will make the same argument that
everyone does to justify state-sponsored
gambling hey it brings in money for good
causes except as I think we've seen by
now lotteries are bad for losers often
bad for winners and a pretty
compromising way to assist state budgets
think about it this way gambling is a
little like alcohol most people like it
some are addicted to it and it's not
like the state can or should outlaw it
altogether
but it would be a little strange if the
state was in the liquor business
advertising it by claiming that every
shot of vodka you drink helps school
children learn yep thank me for being a
friend
I'm going to get those kids an iPad of a
winner everybody's a winner
you